advance-readings/LinkedClaims.md, before:

# Verifiable Presentation of Linked Claim Graph

**Authors:**

Golda Velez (Cooperation.org) <gvelez17@gmail.com>,
Phillip D. Long (T3 Innovation Network) <pl673@georgetown.edu>

## **Introduction**:

That Verifiable Credentials are signed by a DID has value, but to actually evaluate the credibility of a VC 
it is necessary to know something about the DID, essentially to embed the VC in a social graph.

The LinkedClaims vocabulary is designed for exactly this, for easily adding validations to existing claims 
or to entities such as DIDs, in a standard and minimal vocabulary, as well as hashlinking proof documents with a multibase hash.

A Verifiable Presentation of not only a single claim, but hashlinked supporting documents and signed claims validating the original, 
allows the user to evaluate not only the fact of a signature but to estimate the credibility of the claim.

## **Implementation**:

Given a set of related claims retrieved via GraphQL, the Verifiable Presentation mechanism must not only verify each signature individually, but 
validate the relationships of the claims and the multibase hashlinks to the proof documents.

This is actually quite straightforward since the claims are linked by subject, object or source by address.  If the address is a Ceramic stream,
then the validation is automatic on retrieval, as the stream document is already anchored to a blockchain using a content hash.

Otherwise, a multibase hash is required for validation that the contents of the referenced claim or document have not changed.

## **Benefits**:

The ability to retrieve a linked graph of claims enables a credibility estimation that is not possible from a single claim in isolation.

## **Example**:

Simple example, is this claim with a PDF as evidence

```
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1",
    "linked-claim-context.json",
    "schema-mock-context.json",
    "impact-mock-context.json"
  ],
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential"],
  "issuer": {
    "id": "did:employee678",
    "name": "Angel Smith"
  },
  "issuanceDate": "2022-12-01T00:00:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "id": "did:agency987",
    "type": ["LinkedClaim", "Impact"],
    "effectiveDate": "2022-12-01", 
    "statement": "BEMA helped 200 individuals repair their homes after Hurricane Zeta, with ongoing work on at least 50 locations as of this date.",
    "impactClaim": {
        "type": "ImpactClaim",
        "id": "cid:09871234324",
        "impactType":"direct"
    },
    "source": {
         "type": "ClaimSource",
         "id": "https://recoveryagency.com/2022/ReportDetail.pdf",
         "digestMultibase": "QmWATWQ7fVUCs9KuU6XvTkjhP8m8s1ek6G8a5XbtWMEoLb",
         "sourceType": "document",
         "howKnown": "Published to web",
         "dateObserved": "2022-12-01"
      }
    }
}
``` 

In this case, the Verifiable Presentation would not only validate the signature on the VC but also would verify if the source is retrievable and if the hash value is correct. 

## **References**:

[1] http://cooperation.org/credentials/v1/

[2] https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rwot11-the-hague/blob/master/final-documents/composable-credentials.pdf

[3] https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-multiformats-multibase/

Commit message:

discuss kinds of connected credentials

advance-readings/LinkedClaims.md, after:

# Verifiable Presentation of Linked Claim Graph

**Authors:**

Golda Velez (Cooperation.org) <gvelez17@gmail.com>,
Phillip D. Long (T3 Innovation Network) <pl673@georgetown.edu>

## **Introduction**:

That Verifiable Credentials are signed by a DID has value, but to actually evaluate the credibility of a VC 
it is necessary to know something about the DID, essentially to embed the VC in a social graph.

The LinkedClaims vocabulary is designed for exactly this, for easily adding validations to existing claims 
or to entities such as DIDs, in a standard and minimal vocabulary, as well as hashlinking proof documents with a multibase hash.

A Verifiable Presentation of not only a single claim, but hashlinked supporting documents and signed claims validating the original, 
allows the user to evaluate not only the fact of a signature but to estimate the credibility of the claim.

## **Implementation**:

Given a set of related claims retrieved via GraphQL, the Verifiable Presentation mechanism must not only verify each signature individually, but 
validate the relationships of the claims and the multibase hashlinks to the proof documents.

This is actually quite straightforward since the claims are linked by subject, object or source by address.  If the address is a Ceramic stream,
then the validation is automatic on retrieval, as the stream document is already anchored to a blockchain using a content hash.

Otherwise, a multibase hash is required for validation that the contents of the referenced claim or document have not changed.

## **Benefits**:

The ability to retrieve a linked graph of claims enables a credibility estimation that is not possible from a single claim in isolation.

## **Example**:

Simple example, is this claim with a PDF as evidence

```
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1",
    "linked-claim-context.json",
    "schema-mock-context.json",
    "impact-mock-context.json"
  ],
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential"],
  "issuer": {
    "id": "did:employee678",
    "name": "Angel Smith"
  },
  "issuanceDate": "2022-12-01T00:00:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "id": "did:agency987",
    "type": ["LinkedClaim", "Impact"],
    "effectiveDate": "2022-12-01", 
    "statement": "BEMA helped 200 individuals repair their homes after Hurricane Zeta, with ongoing work on at least 50 locations as of this date.",
    "impactClaim": {
        "type": "ImpactClaim",
        "id": "cid:09871234324",
        "impactType":"direct"
    },
    "source": {
         "type": "ClaimSource",
         "id": "https://recoveryagency.com/2022/ReportDetail.pdf",
         "digestMultibase": "QmWATWQ7fVUCs9KuU6XvTkjhP8m8s1ek6G8a5XbtWMEoLb",
         "sourceType": "document",
         "howKnown": "Published to web",
         "dateObserved": "2022-12-01"
      }
    }
}
``` 

In this case, the Verifiable Presentation would not only validate the signature on the VC but also would verify if the source is retrievable and if the hash value is correct. 

## Verifiable Presentations for Composable Credentials and Linked Claim Graphs

In the case of a compound credential as described in [Composable Credentials](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rwot11-the-hague/blob/master/final-documents/composable-credentials.pdf), the compound credential may contain internal or nested links to individual separately signed credentials; and in the case of Linked Claims, a verifiable credential may permissionlessly (and even adversarily) vouch for or contradict another published verifiable credential.

In both of these cases, the graph - the connection between the composed or linked vcs - may be verified via hashlink.

In the case that the child or linked credentials are stored on the Ceramic network, they will have an address that intrinsically contains a verifiable hashlink or CID.  In the case that they are stored on some web2 url, the link to them should be accompanied by a digestMultibase field for verifying that the connected credential has not changed.

While this may sound complex, the Verifiable Presentation simply has to check all links and validate by content hash. 

## **References**:

[1] http://cooperation.org/credentials/v1/

[2] https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rwot11-the-hague/blob/master/final-documents/composable-credentials.pdf

[3] https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-multiformats-multibase/
