# Designing Verifiable Computation Presentations

By: Abhishek Mahadevan Raju (TNO)
Version: 0.1

## Introduction

In the decentralized ecosystem, there is currently a design provided for entities/parties/individuals to provide proof of knowledge and ownership, and to grant such credentials to others. This allows the possibility to generate single-use presentations based on such credentials to prove ownership to a third-party.

A variety of use-cases can be built based on this definition, but we are still limited to the concepts of ownership.
There is potential in extending the existing data model of Verifiable Presentations to include Verifiable Computations (or Proofs of Operations) in order to prove that a certain algorithm(s) has been executed (for instance, in a TEE), or that a certain mandate has been executed according to previously defined contracts. For example, a company may wish to provide tax declarations that regulatory compliance has been done properly, or a contractor may need to prove to a company that quality standards were maintained.

The scope is limited to algorithmic computations - but the use-cases are broad! Data pipeline execution, validated test coverage and security checks, AI/ML model inferencing and many other use-cases may be integrated in a sufficiently flexible and extensible form/specification. Real-world operations may use a context-based Verifiable Credential instead.

In addition, we may also be able to integrate the following concepts:
- Chaining 
    - Allowing for a chaining of Verifiable Computation Presentations through an interconnected sequence of Credential Holders. For example, a financial institution needs a proof of (automated) security audits performed through all components in a Software Supply chain, or a governmental organization ensuring that critical data is always encrypted or decrypted through secure means in the provenance.

- Zero-knowledge 
    - Zero-knowledge (ZK) Verifiable Computations are a well-known extension of ZK algorithms towards Proof of Operation scenarios. Developments in Zero Knowledge in Machine Learning and AI have advanced capabilities of the field to issue proof of computation without revealing the algorithm or data. For example, a dataset is fed into a specific AI model to generate an output, and a proof can be created to verify that this output was indeed generated by the specific algorithm.


## Literature

- Yu, X., Yan, Z. & Vasilakos, A.V. A Survey of Verifiable Computation. Mobile Netw Appl 22, 438–453 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-017-0872-3
- Spectral Finance documentation on Verifiable Computation - https://docs.spectral.finance/decentralized-modeling/verifiable-computation
- EZKL - Easy Zero-Knowledge Inference - https://docs.ezkl.xyz/